docs/source/setup.rst, before:

*****
Setup
*****

db.assays.createIndex({grouping:"text", sample.name:"text", sample.description:"text", sample.source:"text", sample.id:"text", measurement.technique:"text", measurement.description:"text", data_source.reference:"text", data_source.input.notes:"text"})

General requirements
====================
* MongoDB `installed and running <https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/installation/>`_ on a machine (or in a Docker container) that you have access to via the values for "mongodb_host" and "mongodb_port" in your app config JSON file. All assay data is stored in the database specified in the config JSON file in a collection called "assays." This "assays" collection must have a `text index <https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/core/index-text/>`_ on the fields "grouping," "sample.name," "sample.description," "sample.source," "sample.id," "measurement.technique," "measurement.description," "data_source.reference," and "data_source.input.notes" in order for the code to be able to query it properly. You can create this index in the MongoDB shell by running the following commands:
    .. code-block::

        > use DATABASE_NAME
        > db.assays.createIndex({"grouping":"text", "sample.name":"text", "sample.description":"text", "sample.source":"text", "sample.id":"text", "measurement.technique":"text", "measurement.description":"text", "data_source.reference":"text", "data_source.input.notes":"text"}, {"name":"text_index"})
        {
            "createdCollectionAutomatically" : false,
            "numIndexesBefore" : 1,
            "numIndexesAfter" : 2,
            "ok" : 1
        }

  Or you could create the index using a python script with the pymongo package:

    .. code-block::
        :linenos:

        from pymongo import MongoClient, TEXT
        
        # initialize database object
        client = MongoClient("HOST_NAME", PORT_NUM)
        collection = client.DATABASE_NAME.assays
        
        # create text index
        resp = collection.create_index([("grouping",TEXT), ("sample.name",TEXT), ("sample.description",TEXT), ("sample.source",TEXT), ("sample.id",TEXT), ("measurement.technique",TEXT), ("measurement.description",TEXT), ("data_source.reference",TEXT), ("data_source.input.notes",TEXT)], default_language="english", name="text_index")
        
        # verify index exists
        indices = collection.list_indexes()
        print(indices)

* Python >= 3.8
* A conda or virtualenv environment with the contents of requirements.txt installed
    .. code-block::

        $ virtualenv venv -p python3.8
        Running virtualenv with interpreter /usr/bin/python3.8
        Using base prefix '/usr'
        New python executable in /home/username/venv/bin/python3.8
        Also creating executable in /home/username/venv/bin/python
        Installing setuptools, pip, wheel...done.
        $ source venv/bin/activate
        (venv) $ pip install -r requirements.txt


Running the user interface
==========================
Requirements
------------
* A JSON file (preferrably in the "user_interface" directory) containing one JSON object with the following keys and values types: "mongodb_host" (a string with the IP or name of the machine where MongoDB is running), "mongodb_port" (an integer that corresponds to the port that MongoDB is listening on), "database" (the name of the MongoDB database to use for the back-end of the app), "secret_key" (a string that is used to initiate sessions for users; set the value to whatever you perfer), and "salt" (a string that is used with encryption to make password hashes unpredictable).
    * Note: If you are running the app in a Docker container and using the MongoDB instance that is running on the host, you must use "host.docker.internal" as the value for "mongodb_host".
    * Note: If you are running the app in a Docker container, make sure the value you use for "mongodb_port" is mapped to the host when you run the container.
* An `environment variable <https://www.schrodinger.com/kb/1842>`_ named ``DUNE_API_CONFIG_NAME`` whose value is the path to the app config json file
* If you want to host the documentation along with the user interface, create a directory called "docs" in the user_interface/static directory. Then create a `symbolic link <https://www.freecodecamp.org/news/symlink-tutorial-in-linux-how-to-create-and-remove-a-symbolic-link/>`_ from the sphinx docs build to the newly created docs directory by running a command like this: ``ln -s dune/docs/build/html docs`` (this will keep the code in "docs" up to date with the code in "dune/docs/build/html" if it gets rebuilt). Then when you run the user interface, access the docs in your browser at: HOSTNAME:PORT/static/docs/html/index.html. 

Instructions
------------
1. Clone the repository.
2. Activate the virtual environment.
3. ``cd`` into the "user_interface" directory.
4. Run ``./run.sh``.
5. Navigate the browser to localhost:5000/ and you should see the search page.

Docker instructions (this runs the UI container)
------------------------------------------------
1. Ensure that you have either MongoDB running on the host machine at port 27017 or a Docker container running a MongoDB instance on port 27017.
2. Clone the repository and ``cd`` into it.
3. Create the docker image by running the bash script ``create_image.sh`` that is included in the repository. Alternatively, run the command ``docker build --file ./Dockerfile -t dune_image .`` from the top-level directory of the cloned repository. The ``-t dune_image`` flag names the image "dune_image" for ease of use.
4. Run the docker container by running the bash script ``run_docker.sh`` that is included in the repository. Alternatively, execute the following command: ``docker run -d --expose 27017 -p 5000:5000 -p 27017:27017 dune_image``. The ``-p`` arguments connect ports 5000 (for the user interface) and 27017 (for MongoDB) on the docker container to ports 5000 and 27017 on the host, so that the host can access the processes running on those ports via HTTP.
5. Navigate the browser to localhost:5000/ and you should see the launch page.

Docker-compose instructions (this runs the UI and a MongoDB container)
----------------------------------------------------------------------
1. Clone the repository and ``cd`` into it.
2. Build the cluster by running ``docker-compose build``. This uses the ``docker-compose.yml`` file in the top level of the cloned repository.
3. Start the cluster by running ``docker-compose up``.
4. Navigate the browser to localhost:5000/ and you should see the launch page.

For examples on using the user interface, see :ref:`user-interface-tutorial`.


Using the python toolkit on the command line
============================================
1. Clone the repository
2. Activate the virtual environment
3. To get help on how to run the script, run ``python python_mongo_toolkit.py -h``
4. There are three main commands, each with specific subcommands, that can be used:
    * ``search`` Search for an assay in the database. The following arguments can be used with the this command:
        * ``--q``: the query (a python dictionary) to use for the search **must be surrounded by double quotes**
    * ``add_query_term`` Adds a new query term to an existing query. The following arguments pertain to this command:
        * ``--field`` (string) the field to compare the value of
        * ``--compare`` (string) comparison operator to use to compare actual field value to given value (most be one of: "eq", "contains", "notcontains", "gt", "gte", "lt", "lte")
        * ``--val`` (string, int, or float) the value to compare against
        * ``--mode`` (string) optional argument to define append mode. (valid values are "AND" and "OR")
        * ``--q`` (string) existing human readable query string to add a new term to. If not present, creates a new query. **must be surrounded by double quotes**
    * ``insert`` Inserts a new assay into the database. The following arguments pertain to this command:
        * ``--sample_name`` (string) (required) concise sample description
        * ``--sample_description`` (required) (string) detailed sample description
        * ``--data_reference`` (string) (required) where the data came from
        * ``--data_inpu_name`` (string) (required) name of the person/people who performed data input
        * ``--data_input_contact`` (string) (required) email of the person/people who performed data input
        * ``--data_input_date`` (series of strings) (required) series of date strings for dates of input
        * ``--data_input_notes`` (string) input simplifications, assumptions
        * ``--grouping`` (string) experiment name or similar
        * ``--sample_source`` (string) where the sample came from
        * ``--sample_id`` (string) identification number
        * ``--sample_owner_name`` (string) name of who owns the sample
        * ``--sample_owner_contact`` (string) email of who owns the sample
        * ``--measurement_results`` (series of dicts) series of measurement dictionaries (each must have the following fields: "type", "unit", "value", "isotope") **must be surrounded with single quotes, and use double quotes within dict**
        * ``--measurement_practitioner_name`` (string) name of who did the measurement
        * ``--measurement_practitioner_contact`` (string) email of who did the measurement
        * ``--measurement_technique`` (string) technique name
        * ``--measurement_institution`` (string) institution name
        * ``--measurement_date`` (series of strings) series of date strings for dates of measurement
        * ``--measurement_description`` (string) detailed description
        * ``--measurement_requestor_name`` (string) name of who coordinated the measurement
        * ``--measurement_requestor_contact`` (string) email of who coordinated the measurement
    * ``update`` Updates an existing assay in the database. The following arguments pertain to this command:
        * ``--doc_id`` (string) the MongoDB id of the document in the database to update
        * ``--remove_doc`` if present, remove the entire document from the database
        * ``--update_pairs`` (dict) a dict of the fields to update and the corresponding values to update them with. **Must be surrounded with single quotes, and use double quotes within dict**
        * ``--new_meas_objects`` (series of dicts) series of measurement results dictionaries to add to the document. **Must be surrounded with single quotes, and use double quotes within dict**
        * ``--meas_remove_indices`` (series of ints) series of indices (zero-indexed) corresponding to the document measurement result object to remove

For examples on using the python toolkit on the command line, see :ref:`dunetoolkit-commandline-tutorial`.


Using the python toolkit code in a python script
================================================
1. Clone the repository
2. Ensure all requirements from requirements.txt are installed
3. ``cd`` into the dunetoolkit directory and run ``python setup.py install``
4. In the desired python script, import the dunetoolkit package like ``import dunetoolkit``
5. Use any of the available features in your code (for assistance with this, see the documentation on "Toolkit Functions")

For examples on using the python toolkit in a python script, see :ref:`dunetoolkit-script-tutorial`.

Commit message:

Adding notes on creating users when setting up from scratsh; this should be fleshed out further with best practices

docs/source/setup.rst, after:

*****
Setup
*****

General requirements
====================
* Python >= 3.8
* A conda or virtualenv environment with the contents of requirements.txt installed
    .. code-block::

        $ virtualenv venv -p python3.8
        Running virtualenv with interpreter /usr/bin/python3.8
        Using base prefix '/usr'
        New python executable in /home/username/venv/bin/python3.8
        Also creating executable in /home/username/venv/bin/python
        Installing setuptools, pip, wheel...done.
        $ source venv/bin/activate
        (venv) $ pip install -r requirements.txt

* MongoDB `installed and running <https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/installation/>`_ on a machine (or in a Docker container) that you have access to via the values for "mongodb_host" and "mongodb_port" in your app config JSON file. All assay data is stored in the database specified in the config JSON file in a collection called "assays." This "assays" collection must have a `text index <https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/core/index-text/>`_ on the fields "grouping," "sample.name," "sample.description," "sample.source," "sample.id," "measurement.technique," "measurement.description," "data_source.reference," and "data_source.input.notes" in order for the code to be able to query it properly. You can create this index in the MongoDB shell by running the following commands:
    .. code-block::

        > use DATABASE_NAME
        > db.assays.createIndex({"grouping":"text", "sample.name":"text", "sample.description":"text", "sample.source":"text", "sample.id":"text", "measurement.technique":"text", "measurement.description":"text", "data_source.reference":"text", "data_source.input.notes":"text"}, {"name":"text_index"})
        {
            "createdCollectionAutomatically" : false,
            "numIndexesBefore" : 1,
            "numIndexesAfter" : 2,
            "ok" : 1
        }

  Or you could create the index using a python script with the pymongo package:

    .. code-block::
        :linenos:

        from pymongo import MongoClient, TEXT
        
        # initialize database object
        client = MongoClient("HOST_NAME", PORT_NUM)
        collection = client.DATABASE_NAME.assays
        
        # create text index
        resp = collection.create_index([("grouping",TEXT), ("sample.name",TEXT), ("sample.description",TEXT), ("sample.source",TEXT), ("sample.id",TEXT), ("measurement.technique",TEXT), ("measurement.description",TEXT), ("data_source.reference",TEXT), ("data_source.input.notes",TEXT)], default_language="english", name="text_index")
        
        # verify index exists
        indices = collection.list_indexes()
        print(indices)

* A database administrator must create two users in the "users" collection of the database specified in the config file. One must have username "DUNEreader" and the other must have the username "DUNEwriter." The user elements in the database should have the following format: ``{"user_mode":"DUNEreader", "password_hashed":"abc123"}``. Before inserting, the password for each of the users must be hashed using the python "scrypt" package like so: ``encrypted_pw = scrypt.hash(plaintext_password, salt, N=16)`` where the salt is specified in the config file.

Running the user interface
==========================
Requirements
------------
* A JSON file (preferrably in the "user_interface" directory) containing one JSON object with the following keys and values types: "mongodb_host" (a string with the IP or name of the machine where MongoDB is running), "mongodb_port" (an integer that corresponds to the port that MongoDB is listening on), "database" (the name of the MongoDB database to use for the back-end of the app), "secret_key" (a string that is used to initiate sessions for users; set the value to whatever you perfer), and "salt" (a string that is used with encryption to make password hashes unpredictable).
    * Note: If you are running the app in a Docker container and using the MongoDB instance that is running on the host, you must use "host.docker.internal" as the value for "mongodb_host".
    * Note: If you are running the app in a Docker container, make sure the value you use for "mongodb_port" is mapped to the host when you run the container.
* An `environment variable <https://www.schrodinger.com/kb/1842>`_ named ``DUNE_API_CONFIG_NAME`` whose value is the path to the app config json file
* If you want to host the documentation along with the user interface, create a directory called "docs" in the user_interface/static directory. Then create a `symbolic link <https://www.freecodecamp.org/news/symlink-tutorial-in-linux-how-to-create-and-remove-a-symbolic-link/>`_ from the sphinx docs build to the newly created docs directory by running a command like this: ``ln -s dune/docs/build/html docs`` (this will keep the code in "docs" up to date with the code in "dune/docs/build/html" if it gets rebuilt). Then when you run the user interface, access the docs in your browser at: HOSTNAME:PORT/static/docs/html/index.html. 

Instructions
------------
1. Clone the repository.
2. Activate the virtual environment.
3. ``cd`` into the "user_interface" directory.
4. Run ``./run.sh``.
5. Navigate the browser to localhost:5000/ and you should see the search page.

Docker instructions (this runs the UI container)
------------------------------------------------
1. Ensure that you have either MongoDB running on the host machine at port 27017 or a Docker container running a MongoDB instance on port 27017.
2. Clone the repository and ``cd`` into it.
3. Create the docker image by running the bash script ``create_image.sh`` that is included in the repository. Alternatively, run the command ``docker build --file ./Dockerfile -t dune_image .`` from the top-level directory of the cloned repository. The ``-t dune_image`` flag names the image "dune_image" for ease of use.
4. Run the docker container by running the bash script ``run_docker.sh`` that is included in the repository. Alternatively, execute the following command: ``docker run -d --expose 27017 -p 5000:5000 -p 27017:27017 dune_image``. The ``-p`` arguments connect ports 5000 (for the user interface) and 27017 (for MongoDB) on the docker container to ports 5000 and 27017 on the host, so that the host can access the processes running on those ports via HTTP.
5. Navigate the browser to localhost:5000/ and you should see the launch page.

Docker-compose instructions (this runs the UI and a MongoDB container)
----------------------------------------------------------------------
1. Clone the repository and ``cd`` into it.
2. Build the cluster by running ``docker-compose build``. This uses the ``docker-compose.yml`` file in the top level of the cloned repository.
3. Start the cluster by running ``docker-compose up``.
4. Navigate the browser to localhost:5000/ and you should see the launch page.

For examples on using the user interface, see :ref:`user-interface-tutorial`.


Using the python toolkit on the command line
============================================
1. Clone the repository
2. Activate the virtual environment
3. To get help on how to run the script, run ``python python_mongo_toolkit.py -h``
4. There are three main commands, each with specific subcommands, that can be used:
    * ``search`` Search for an assay in the database. The following arguments can be used with the this command:
        * ``--q``: the query (a python dictionary) to use for the search **must be surrounded by double quotes**
    * ``add_query_term`` Adds a new query term to an existing query. The following arguments pertain to this command:
        * ``--field`` (string) the field to compare the value of
        * ``--compare`` (string) comparison operator to use to compare actual field value to given value (most be one of: "eq", "contains", "notcontains", "gt", "gte", "lt", "lte")
        * ``--val`` (string, int, or float) the value to compare against
        * ``--mode`` (string) optional argument to define append mode. (valid values are "AND" and "OR")
        * ``--q`` (string) existing human readable query string to add a new term to. If not present, creates a new query. **must be surrounded by double quotes**
    * ``insert`` Inserts a new assay into the database. The following arguments pertain to this command:
        * ``--sample_name`` (string) (required) concise sample description
        * ``--sample_description`` (required) (string) detailed sample description
        * ``--data_reference`` (string) (required) where the data came from
        * ``--data_inpu_name`` (string) (required) name of the person/people who performed data input
        * ``--data_input_contact`` (string) (required) email of the person/people who performed data input
        * ``--data_input_date`` (series of strings) (required) series of date strings for dates of input
        * ``--data_input_notes`` (string) input simplifications, assumptions
        * ``--grouping`` (string) experiment name or similar
        * ``--sample_source`` (string) where the sample came from
        * ``--sample_id`` (string) identification number
        * ``--sample_owner_name`` (string) name of who owns the sample
        * ``--sample_owner_contact`` (string) email of who owns the sample
        * ``--measurement_results`` (series of dicts) series of measurement dictionaries (each must have the following fields: "type", "unit", "value", "isotope") **must be surrounded with single quotes, and use double quotes within dict**
        * ``--measurement_practitioner_name`` (string) name of who did the measurement
        * ``--measurement_practitioner_contact`` (string) email of who did the measurement
        * ``--measurement_technique`` (string) technique name
        * ``--measurement_institution`` (string) institution name
        * ``--measurement_date`` (series of strings) series of date strings for dates of measurement
        * ``--measurement_description`` (string) detailed description
        * ``--measurement_requestor_name`` (string) name of who coordinated the measurement
        * ``--measurement_requestor_contact`` (string) email of who coordinated the measurement
    * ``update`` Updates an existing assay in the database. The following arguments pertain to this command:
        * ``--doc_id`` (string) the MongoDB id of the document in the database to update
        * ``--remove_doc`` if present, remove the entire document from the database
        * ``--update_pairs`` (dict) a dict of the fields to update and the corresponding values to update them with. **Must be surrounded with single quotes, and use double quotes within dict**
        * ``--new_meas_objects`` (series of dicts) series of measurement results dictionaries to add to the document. **Must be surrounded with single quotes, and use double quotes within dict**
        * ``--meas_remove_indices`` (series of ints) series of indices (zero-indexed) corresponding to the document measurement result object to remove

For examples on using the python toolkit on the command line, see :ref:`dunetoolkit-commandline-tutorial`.


Using the python toolkit code in a python script
================================================
1. Clone the repository
2. Ensure all requirements from requirements.txt are installed
3. ``cd`` into the dunetoolkit directory and run ``python setup.py install``
4. In the desired python script, import the dunetoolkit package like ``import dunetoolkit``
5. Use any of the available features in your code (for assistance with this, see the documentation on "Toolkit Functions")

For examples on using the python toolkit in a python script, see :ref:`dunetoolkit-script-tutorial`.
